Welcome to the final lecture on
the theme of thought, consciousness, and intelligence.
This is a joint lecture and in the first video
I will lead us in an interdisciplinary enquiry
about what it entails for computers to be human-like.
Subsequently, Dr. Nick and Prof Vik
will present the overarching issues surrounding AI.
The goal of this is to guide us in sensemaking
and to consider the future of humans, of computers
and how intelligent we want these to be.
First up, let us begin with the question
“Does AI already have human-level intelligence?”
From our lectures so far, we have talked about cognition
how language is associated with cognition
the role of the human brain in enabling these
and the parallel with computers.
Remember that in the first lecture
we introduced the great mathematician Alan Turing
who asked a simple but very important question.
Do you remember what this is?
“Can machines think?”
This was the simple question that pushed
the world of computers to out-invent, push boundaries
and fast forward to today, we are now asking the question of
what AI is and can AI think.
It seems like Turing had a hunch that computers have intelligence
and that hunch looks to now be the reality.
But having created computers that can think, and if they can think like us
there is value for us to try and understand how they work.
According to Chen and colleagues in this article published in nature
finding answers for this requires a conceptual alignment
across the disciplines of philosophy
machine learning, linguistics, and cognitive science.
A way to do this is to adopt common frameworks
that bring together various disciplines
to study the nature of human language
and its reproducibility in machines.
With this in mind, at the end of this video
you should be able to assess the value of an interdisciplinary approach
in understanding the cognitive neuroscience of language.
Next, if LLMs are intelligent, can we engage in an interdisciplinary approach
and “scan” their brains?
Finally, we will return to consider and rethink
what is the criteria for intelligence
in connection with the next video about issues with human-like computers.
To begin, studying the cognitive neuroscience of language
requires an interdisciplinary effort
as the topics involved are cross-cutting in nature.
At the Institute of Language, Communication and the Brain
ILCB, for instance, research groups working on
understanding different aspects of language perception
come together to tackle the four key questions:
What are the origins of language in individuals and across species?
What are the cognitive, linguistics, and neural dynamics
that enable language and communication?
Can we quantify and model dynamic phenomena at different scales?
And, how to explain and remediate language
and communication dysfunctions?
Notice that we have gathered knowledge
of some of these questions in our earlier lectures!
So, how might we use this knowledge to come up with a framework
and gather an informed sense of what intelligence is about?
Let us consider a framework
that brings together the disciplines of our interest
namely linguistics, neuroanatomy, data science, and psychology.
What is common is that each of these disciplines
apply the scientific approach.
That is, individually, we care about the theories
that guide the scientific study of language
we conceptualise hypotheses to probe the accuracy of these theories
we develop systematic methods to test these hypotheses
such as through experimental methodology.
But for the disciplines to connect
it requires us to reflect on the disciplinary assumptions
and consider how these might change
when we put another discipline into the picture.
So, what are some of these assumptions?
Well, there are many of course
but at a broad level, linguistics considers language
as a unique cognitive capacity
and we have seen in our lectures
how language is something that is distinctively human.
In neuroanatomy, the cytoarchitecture of the brain
is distinct from region to region
and assumed to be the basis for cognitive capacities
with evidence showing that there are dedicated brain areas
and neural networks that serve language function.
Next, in Data Science, the observation
of statistical regularities in how language is used
puts forth the assumption of the brain as a predictive machine
much like modern day computers.
Last, but not least, in Psychology
we treat language as a cognitive function
that is part of a set of interdependent cognitive capacities
that culminates as intelligence and produces human behaviours.
As we go through these assumptions
do you visualize the overlaps in approaches
and how the convergence of these methods of thought
brings us to our current issue of interest
whether there can be human-like computers?
Let’s try to apply this interdisciplinary framework of assumptions
to try and understand how machines think.
Here, let’s take a look at the following news feature
on how does ChatGPT think.
According to Hutson, what researchers can do is to “reverse-engineer”
and so-call “scan the brains” of LLMs.
Here, “scanning brains of LLMs” is figurative because
as we saw in an earlier lecture
the physical architecture of computers is less complex than that of humans
and they can be taken apart with ease.
Though, just like there are multiple ways of studying human intelligence
through an interdisciplinary lens, such is also the case for machines.
Critically, when we apply an interdisciplinary framework to this
although LLMs do not have neuroanatomy so to speak
we can integrate linguistics, data science, and psychology
to assess how they think by designing experiments
that probe the linguistic behaviours of LLMs
track their frequency of occurrences
and how they evolve with newer models.
How do we test the linguistic behaviours of LLMs?
In simple terms, we can treat LLMs as human subjects
since they can speak our language.
We then ask specific questions that probe their thinking styles
and observe how they respond
or change when we ask subsequent questions.
Here, do you find the approach similar
to a concept we have encountered previously?
If you are thinking of language acquisition, you are on track
because a key question that Dr. Nick discussed then
was the extent that LLMs can learn language
and whether this is like language learning by children.
Here, see that the concept of language acquisition can be extended
to the case of machines
and the concept connects the various disciplines of interest
and their fundamental assumptions to understand machine cognition.
Let’s take a look at two examples of how this can be done.
The first example is chain of thought
where if the chatbot is asked to lay out and explain
how they arrive at an answer
they tend to be more reliable
although this vary from one AI model to another
and we also need to take into account
the build versions as AI models are constantly improved.
On the left, when a standard prompting
without asking the chatbot to explain the steps
it is more likely to produce biased answers
because large language models may not be able to sense that
the context of the scenario requires
the problem to be solved through sub-steps.
Therefore, it attempts to solve the puzzles in a single step
and may pick up only certain numbers that are more frequently encountered
through its training data and then hallucinate an answer.
On the right, when the chatbot is asked to reason and explain its steps
it has no problem deriving the correct answer.
Such a revelation shows that it is not really
whether chatbots are able to solve math problems
but how it goes about reasoning the problem to figure a solution.
Even for us humans we make mistakes as well and we learn from them.
Therefore, the question is how well can LLMs learn
and adapt from past encounters of similar problems.
Although we say that chatbots have trouble learning and adapting
sometimes, it actually does, but not in quite a way that is flexible.
For example, if a chatbot is pre-conditioned with questions that
where the answer is always A, it repeats this for the next question
without analysing the question in detail
and even hallucinate an explanation for it.
This is what is known as false logic.
The issue is problematic
because the explanation provided can feel very real, but it isn’t.
Reflecting on this, in relation to what we have discussed
in an earlier lecture on the need for models to be interpretable
especially in scenarios that demand accuracy, reliability and transparency
we cannot expect the output from LLMs to be always accurate
but such experiments make us aware
of the biases that are present in chatbots
and find ways to improve on their interpretability.
More importantly, it helps us gather a sense of how LLMs acquire language
their ability for thought, and how similar they are to us.
But even though we can manipulate and observe LLM behaviours
is there a way to understand the inner workings of the system?
Remember that in our earlier lectures, we have seen that LLMs evolved
from basic n-grams, neural networks, and transformer architectures.
If we can uncover patterns of machine activity
in relation to linguistic behaviours
then we are essentially scanning the brains of LLMs
over and on top of understanding their psychology.
How to do this?
In this work by Zou and colleagues
they conduct what is called representation engineering
which is to measure neural activity in relation to linguistic behaviors.
Here, they examine dishonest LLM behaviours
which have real-world implications.
From the figure, the first step is to design an experiment
similar to what we have discussed, treating LLMs as human subjects.
Essentially, the key manipulation is two conditions
where in one condition, the machine is prompted to be dishonest
and opposite in the other.
Next, statistical models are constructed
to extract the machine’s neural activity
in relation to their linguistic behaviours.
The output of these models, which are termed reading vectors
can then be used to monitor and predict the
honesty level of subsequent LLM behaviours.
The design of this pipeline is intriguing
as it brings together the disciplines of Linguistics and Psychology
i.e. designing the behavioural experiment
as well as statistics to model the inner working of the linguistics behaviours.
It also highlights the potential of undertaking interdisciplinary efforts
for real-world applications.
And it may well be the case that lie detection in machines
can be more accurate and reliable than in humans
given the higher precision in their cognitive architecture.
That said, each present their own unique challenges
and innovations like this help us keep track of model performance
even as newer models of LLMs roll out.
Having seen the excitement of interdisciplinary experiments
to understand linguistic behaviours and machine intelligence
and their potential for real-world benefits
it is not always the case that disciplines of interest
can easily align with one another.
What this means is that there are fundamental challenges
when it comes to interdisciplinary integration
behind the scenes of cutting edge LLM research.
In a review by Embick and Poeppel published
in Language, Cognition and Neuroscience
they considered what it takes for an integrated approach to study language
that is rooted in theoretical, experimental, and neurobiological enquiry.
Here, the problem is that individual
disciplines like linguistics and neuroscience
have their own basic concepts such as in the case of linguistics
there are objects like morphemes
and operations like semantic composition, among others.
However, in trying to be interdisciplinary
it is not necessarily the case that an object in one discipline
would map easily onto another.
For instance, a neuroscientist would not be able to find a corresponding neuron
for each and every morpheme that the linguist identifies.
And a linguist would not be able to easily take a particular phrase
and find a corresponding neuroscience unit either.
Therefore, the challenge of interdisciplinary science requires us to consider
how to find common ground between disciplines
to connect the theories across disciplines.
Similarly, in this comment published in 1999, which is dated in today’s terms
Gibbs and Matlock cautioned psychologists and linguists on the overreliance
of psychological experiments alone in studying the nature of language.
Yet, when we apply the scientific approach
we rely on a fair number of intuitions and looking at today
it is no doubt that these intuitions have helped us form
a systematic understanding of how language works
and what is human about it.
Looking back at the beginning of this video on whether
human-like machine intelligence is now the reality
perhaps what Chen and colleagues put forth
is applying an interdisciplinary framework
to understand LLMs from an alternative angle
by considering whether there is value in equating machine
and human intelligence and finding a common ground
for what is general intelligence.
On whether there is value equating human and machine intelligence
they argue that a review of current objections to GI in LLMs
noting that when LLMs first made debut in the human world
people were skeptical of how human they can be.
And here are some of these objections that people have about LLMs.
I would like you to pick one of them, reflect
and share your thoughts on possible counterarguments.
Hint, you may want to think about some modern developments in LLM technology
that are allowing these limitations to be overcome.
As an interdisciplinary effort, try and
see if you can approach these issues using
one or more disciplines of relevance.
Let’s take a look at each of these objections
and how interdisciplinary efforts have changed our assumptions of them.
Firstly, when it is said that LLMs are no more than stochastic parrots
one might also argue that humans are also stochastic parrots
but in a more sophisticated form.
As time progressed, interdisciplinary research
from the angles of linguistics and psychology has revealed
emergent behaviours of LLMs such as debugging program codes
and contextual awareness when given the appropriate prompts.
Secondly, on the point that LLMs lack real world representations
extensive work from the field of statistics and data science
gathering data across thousands of scenarios and across models
has shown that LLMs have improved considerably
in making reasonable predictions under differing circumstances.
Thirdly, although the initial view was that LLMs only understand words
because they are trained on text
modern LLMs are able to handle multimodal tasks
and they are no longer restricted only to training
and responding to linguistic material.
Moving on, the objection of self-agency in LLMs is pertinent
because after all, LLMs act on the prompts we give them
as opposed to initiating and making decisions on their own.
But, as we have seen in the introductory lecture
AI are increasingly deployed in real-world applications
many of which entail moral responsibility
such as in the case of self-driving vehicles.
Presently, psychology researchers are looking at issues
surrounding the moral agency of artificial intelligence
against the bigger concern whether autonomy
is necessary for general intelligence.
Lastly, we all know that LLMs are prone to hallucinations which can be irksome
but psychology has also revealed that we humans make just as many mistakes
remembering and recalling things!
Hence, to get humans and machines to talk to one another
we need to rethink what general intelligence is.
As Chen and colleagues argue
“a definition that excludes essentially all humans
is not a definition of general intelligence.
Rather, general intelligence is about having sufficient breadth
and depth of cognitive abilities.”
The key here is, what is “sufficient”.
Whether this means that AI must overtake us in everything we do
or for them to be able to think and solve within their own limits.
As they go on to argue, general intelligence isn’t about perfection
as neither humans nor AI can be perfect in everything they do.
GI is also not about universality as there are always problems
that cannot be solved even for us humans.
Moreover, a human-like machine is a plus but not necessarily a must
as AI can still be intelligent even though they are not human-like.
Lastly, it is common for AI to be thought of as being superintelligent
for being able to do things that we can’t
but this not a fair criteria of evaluation
because there also a fair number of things
that other species can do that we can’t
and it is not really an issue of one being more intelligent than another
but rather every species having their own
set of specialized skills and knowledge.
Again, take a pause, think about what GI is and isn’t
and share your candid thoughts and arguments
for or against them on the following Miro board.
Also, think about and share some examples or real-world applications
that might elucidate or help to disentangle these issues
and reflect on one another’s ideas.
I look forward to your candid sharing!
To end, it is important to note that these issues about general intelligence
are continuously debated upon
and there is no particular view that triumphs others.
As such, as you put together your own perspectives
see that these issues put forth meaningful challenges
that encourage interdisciplinary integration.
In summary, we have in this video explored
what it means for computers to be human-like
which requires an integration of scientific and interdisciplinary knowledge.
In reviewing the key assumptions that we have encountered across the lectures
we should realise that the study of the cognitive neuroscience of language
cannot be reduced to a simple one-to-one mapping across the disciplines.
Next, understanding how LLM behaves
helps us improve and develop better future models.
By applying methods from psychology
we can scientifically assess machine intelligence.
Lastly, in returning to Alan Turing’s question about whether machines can think
the rapid improvement in the performance of AI necessitates
a reflection of the initial objections to general intelligence in LLM.
More so, a clearer definition of what GI is
can help better evaluate AI competence in the decades to come.
In the next videos, Dr. Nick will walk you through in greater detail
on specific cases and scenarios where computers are potentially human-like
and to what extent they should be.
Also, Prof Vik will share his thoughts on
defining consciousness and intelligence
which will be helpful for you to keep in mind
some of the arguments made in this video.
Consider what we have discussed in this video
as you reflect on the examples and ask what it takes
for humans and machines to talk to one another!
